---
layout: post
title: I need to talk about K
---

Today we went and planted a memorial tree for my father. It was a gently happy affair; the tree was offered by the park preservation society my father had belonged to, and the planting was performed with almost no ceremony, aside from a bit of photography. Largely in keeping with what Dad would have wanted. There was a curious byproduct, however: for the first time in perhaps 25 years I got to converse with my parents' neighbours. They didn't used to be my parents' neighbours though. They used to be my best friend's parents.

"KH" and I were best of friends from the ages of 6 to 11. His parents are American, and always had an air of the exotic sophistication about them. KH's dad worked for IBM, while his mother was artistic and had hobbies doing life drawing and making pottery. The family introduced me to popcorn, which in the early 80s was pretty _oeutre_. As for KH he was intelligent and usually laughed at my jokes, though he was a bit more serious than me. He had groovy portable pacman game, and a supremely groovy Lego spaceship (set 924). In the mid 80s he got me into Dungeons & Dragons. Every day we would walk home from school together, the short walk enlivened by stimulating debate on numerous subjects. We were good friends, and he meant a lot to me.

Things began to sour between us in intermediate school (years 7 & 8). We met other nerdy kids and became friends with them, and I began to sense that KH was becoming a bit bored with me. Given that at the time I was consuming desperately old-fashioned things like James Herriot and Agatha Christie novels, and constantly enthusing about Doctor Who, I'm not entirely unsympathetic to his plight. Even now, 35 years later, I still feel a profound sense of shame at just how weirdly backwards I was, like some sort of two generation throwback. I probably don't need to explain myself, but I did find the Dad's Army world of my grandparents fascinating. (Just remember that when people bang on about the 80s as this mythic age of neon colours and Stephen Spielberg, well, during the real 80s there were also - as with any age - other cultural currents in play.)

KH's boredom initially manifested as a quiet lack of engagement with my enthusiasms. But we still walked home together from the train, and I continued to count him as my best friend. By the time we got to high school, though, his reticence had gradually expanded into a profound silence. He had nothing to say to me, and on our walks home he did not speak except in response to something I said. From this I got the impression that he was playing a sort of power game with me, and my resentment at KH's apparent vow of silence began to grow. No longer having anything to lose, I tested out the extent of his indifference by resolving to say nothing him either. Would the awkwardness cause him to cave in? Nope; in the end we made it all the way to his house in perfect silence. I was so insensed that I angrily flounced off home.

The final straw came at the start of year 10. Getting on the train after school, some friends had a go at me with a fairly low level of mockery. It was just your standard teenage cuntyness, really, but KH joined in with the ribbing, and because of the weird way he acted with me, I felt this as a profound betrayal. Realising that the only time he acknowledged me was to mock me, something snapped inside me. This time I started abusing him at the start of the walk home rather than the finish. He didn't really say anything in response, and, disgusted, I resolved never to talk to him again.

What I really hoped, of course, was that KH would apologise, and we could reset the whole relationship. That didn't happen; he continued behaving as if I didn't exist, and, unable to swallow my pride and resume putting up with him, I had no choice but to do the same.

The only insight I had into how KH felt about things came second hand: a fatalistic acknowledgement that I hated him. This was a predictably passive, Eyoreish stance to take; for him my anger was something that happened to him rather than something his behaviour had contributed to. If he had made the merest token amount of effort at reconciliation, we could still have been acquaintances. But that didn't seem to be an option for him. In any event my hurt pride ensured that I had to ignoring him (his policy to me never really changed).

What was more galling is that he continued to engage with my peers normally, and they with him. At first my policy provided me with solace that I was at least nobody's fool, but by year 11 KH became the centre of a group of people interested in the burgeoning world of alt rock. See, through his older sister (her first name also starting with a K, so let's call her Sister K) KH had access to sophisticated music tastes and was able to channel them into his social circle like a prophet. Suddenly my friends were listening to all these cool and exciting bands, and by second-hand osmosis I gradually became both intrigued and jealous, because I'd liked to have been openly curious about them, but I couldn't because that would mean acknowledging KH's part in its dissemination. Initially, instead, I maintained my usual reactionary pose by indulging in Classical music and 1970s synth music. But there was no avoiding KH's music-loving supremacy. I think his greatest coup was that he saw (or at least had) a Nirvana t-shirt from a gig they did in Auckland in early 1992, just as Nevermind went global. (As it's turned out, that was probably peak KH.)

Fast forward a few years and in my final year of university I decided to bury the hatchet. On the bus into town (these things always happened on public transport), I sat next to him and struck up a conversation that proved civil, if not particularly rewarding. We spoke another couple of times. Nothing was patched up at all, really, but I felt consoled that by at least making an effort, and transcending my earlier childishness. I was content to leave things there.

I haven't seen KH since. I forget when exactly, eventually he KH moved to New York and was working as a programmer, I think. I would get periodic updates from his parents through my parents, feeling a slight sense of jealousy at his exotic life. But in 2014 KH returned to NZ with his marriage over, and - again according to his parents - in a bit of a bad way mentally. (Around the same time Sister K returned to Wellington from her own sojourn in the US. Apparently impoverished, she resumed living with her parents, in her early 40s, apparently lacking funds to even live independently.) The news from my parents in the years since has been scanty, but I haven't heard that KH has gotten back on his feet, and I imagine his parents would be keen to broadcast the news if he had.

While I was surprised and dismayed at KH's apparent decline, there were hints at this outcome in his teenage behaviour. He was highly intelligent, but that intelligence just left him bored. He engaged with the nihilism of grunge music, but that music was a dead end, nothing more than a howl of protest, with nothing else to follow. (And that whole generation of gen-X musicians were profoundly fucked up, with addiction and suicide being frequent outcomes.) So when it came time for KH to face the Real World, he was fundamentally disinclined to engage, and eventually crashed out.

All the same, he and I aren't so dissimilar. I'm a gen-Xer too, and I've had similar struggles trying to engage with the real world. It's quite possible I could have ended up the same way.

More generally, I've known other highly intelligent people who haven't lived up to their potential, and sort of shuffle through life. I label this phenomenon "functional uselessness" (FU, appropriately), a term which is bluntly perjorative, but has the benefit being clear and memorable. The only upside of this condition is that it's environmentally friendly - it's harder to cook the planet when you lack the resources to meaningfully affect it. Potentially FU people could be happy, but in my experience they lead lives highly circumscribed by their poverty. They tend to be habitual users of public transport and public libraries, and that's about it.

Is it horrible to discriminate people in this way? Absolutely, but now I'm a parent I think it's important to identify mistakes in people's lives so I can steer my boy away from making them. Despite suffering a fair amount of FU myself, I had the common sense to continue working (mostly) even when I thought the system was BS, and had the luck to find a long term partner who didn't pander to my stick-in-the-mud instincts, and forced me to transcend them (despite the continual discomfort I felt doing so).

So anyway, there my family was today, planting a tree in honour of my dad. KH's parents were there, kind and normal like they had always seemed to me (not sure what happened with their kids?!). I didn't ask them about KH, guessing the subject might be awkward.

I should acknowledge that a big part of this essay is taking the opportunity to gloat at an enemy. Am I being petty in doing so? Yes! Look, it just feels really strange, having felt dominated and demeaned by someone during my formative years, to find that in middle age I've ended up with the better hand in life - not through any great achievement on my own part, but because he sort of came to a standstill.

Ultimately though, the gloating feels hollow because I can't say that KH was ever a true enemy - I'm not sure he behaved as he did out of malice, rather than being emotionally incapable of doing otherwise. And however surprising they might seem to me, comparing our life trajectories isn't particularly meaningful. Even so, the memories and the emotional scars are still there, and nothing short of death or dementia will erase them. But for now, it's time to let it go. Until the next time it's time to let it go.