My first telescope: 1987 - 1989


When I was a boy in the mid 80s the return of Halley's Comet got me interested in stargazing. The comet itself was a bit of a fizzer, but it set off something in me. I can't explain why the feeling happened for me any more than I can explain why it doesn't happen for most people. All I can say is that at night when the sky is clear, I'm always curious about what there is to see.

I started my journey with some library books and my dad's 7x35mm binoculars, which had previously been used soley for scanning nags on the back strait at Trentham race course. The binoculars weren't powerful but they provided a reasonable starter view: the stars and planets I could already see with just my eyes, plus a little more glint and glimmer. My appetite was further whetted.

After about a year of binocular observings, I began yearn for a telescope. My grandfather heard of this and arranged for me to meet Frank Andrews, an astronomer at Wellington's Carter Observatory (as was). Andrews had been on TV a bit during the visit of Halley's comet, and he was jolly and bearded and helpful. I was shocked on behalf of my granddad's straight-laced sensibilities when Andrews described physiscists as "arrogant bastards" (not that he was wrong...). Frustratingly he recommended I get a larger pair of binoculars rather than a telescope. Despite this (literally) sage advice, I continued to yearn for a telescope.

Around the same time (this was first term 1987) my dad went on a work trip to Australia and brought back a copy of the American magazine Astronomy. In it there were dozens of pages of advertising flash-as telescopes in a multitide of varieties, some with computer-guided go-to mounts. The brand names "Celestron", and "Meade" were chiselled into my mind. I think I must have had enough of an idea of the US to NZ exchange rate to know that there was no way I'd end up with one of those high-end scopes, but I was thrilled just knowing they existed.

Instead, I aspired to get a modest refracting telescope - one with a 60mm or 70mm lens. (It's worth pointing out here that teleseopes are measured primarily by the aperture of their primary lens or reflecting mirror. This is because while you can change magnification using different eyepieces, the amount of light a telescope can gather is to the width of the light collecting source.) The trouble is, there wasn't really a place in Wellington you could buy telescopes back then; in fact I don't believe there's one even today. In 1987 the closest telescope vendor we knew of (via occasional newspaper ads in the Dominion) was a chemist's in Masterton. We visited them but although I was keen, for some reason that I no longer recall, my parents weren't. Thwarted again!

After that I saw a ~$30 40mm refractor in a mail order catalogue. This time my parents were willing, and I recall coming home from school each day during the following weeks hoping the telescope had arrived. When it did finally arrive it proved to be a piece of crap, so we sent it back. It was now third term 1987, and my quest remaines fruitless.

Finally my parents spotted a classifieds listing (if you've never seen one of these it's like a Trademe or Ebay listing in a newspaper) for a second hand 4" reflecting telescope with a non-motorised equatorial mount. (A kind of telescope that uses mirrors to focus light rather than lenses) After a cursory inspection at the seller's house my dad shelled out $400 for it, a sum I suspect was a good deal more than he or my mum wanted to pay. There was certaintly some anxiety expressed over whether I would get "good use" out of it. Unfortunately, there's no objective measure of "good use", so I'm unsure to this day whether I made the grade. (I could ask my mum, but I might not like the answer...)

Anyway, I now had my heart's desire, and I eagerly set about scanning the heavens. Optically the telescope performed reasonably; it was a big step up from binoculars. But I had great trouble pointing the thing towards my intended target. Equatorial mounts are designed so that users can more easily track an object as the earth's rotation carries it across the sky. However they need to be aligned to the north (or in my case south) celestial pole. Once I tried to align it didn't find the operation any easier, so I didn't bother. The mount's gears were quite stiff, too (we didn't have any grease and it never occurred to me to obtain some), and one of the tracking controls tended to unscrew itself as I turned it. Worse still, I was apparently incapable of aligning the finder scope (a low power second scope attached to the main telescope body, used to locate objects in the heavens), so accessing what I was looking for and keeping it within view was much harder than it should have been. A further problem was obtaining maps of the night sky. All I had was modest astronomical handbook with simple maps of the constellations, in which, frustratingly, most deep sky objects (DSOs - nebulae, star clusters, and galaxies) were described as 'visible in telescopes of 6" or greater aperture', and therefore not worth my looking for them.

Despite these problems I persevered and managed to view the planets and the brighter southern DSOs. Over the next two years I got a reasonable amount of use from the telescope, albeit with decreasing frequency. Eventually my interest ran its course, and the telescope was reduced to being a prop in my bedroom. This would have been an interesting talking point for visiting girls, but sadly no girls ever visited. The telescope lingered at my parents' house for some years after I moved out. Eventually - in my late 20s - a work colleague reported her teen sister was interested in astronomy, and I took the opportunity to offload the scope on her, in exchange for a batch of aghan biscuits. It remains the best (and tastiest) deal I ever made.

In the intervening years I grew up and developed interests in other things, but I maintained a passive interest in matters astronomical. I always felt I'd go back to it, at some point, but now never felt like the right time. Whenever I gave the subject some thought, I always concluded that a "proper" return to astronomy was best left until I retired. Despite my own example, I always imagined backyard astronomers as elderly, and when you are elderly you have lots of time to sleep in if you're up late staring at the cosmos. (On the other hand, when you're elderly your night vision deteriorates.)

Two events changed that view. The first was the unexpectedly early demise of my father, and the second was the advent of Covid 19. Now I don't think that Covid is necessarily going to snuff me out, but the pandemic has, for now at least, left the future deeply uncertain, and this situation has motivated me to just generally stop pissing away my time and get a move on. So as lockdown ended I decided to finally do something.



The agony and ecstacy of choosing a second telescope


It took many weeks of research to determine what that something would actually be. A lot of things had changed since 1987, some good, some complicating. On the good side, I had the internet, featuring a wealth of information on amateur astronomy. On the complicating side: the internet again, providing almost too much information, and definitely too many opinions.

Initially I wanted to orient astronomy around my family. This plan was to purchase a reasonably sized refractor (say 100mm), portable enough to take travelling and easier for my five year old to use if he became interested when he got older. The problem with this approach is that it would be a bit old hat for me, and as much as I'd like astronomy to be fun for the whole family, I was the only one in the house (for now, at least) truly interested in it.

In a similar vein I pondered trying out astrophotography, since my wife is interested in photography and again I was keen to integrate (and perhaps justify) my hobby as not being solely about me. I constructed an elaborate plan with mulitple phases: start modestly by making star trail shots using our existing, underused DSLR; then I (I mean we) would buy a motorised tracking mount and do long-exposure wide-field imaging. If we were still interested after all that we could image deep sky objects by buying a refracto  . One evening I attempted to implement phase one with an SLR star-trail time lapse photo, but after some frustration concluded we'd be better off buying a new SLR. This kind of ruined the low-cost approach to the endeavour. Worse still, I wasn't too fussed about astrophotography, at least right now. Well, I'm curious about it, but it involves a lot of convoluted post-processing on a computer, and because I work as a software developer, I'd rather be doing something that gets me away from computer screens.

That sort of thinking gave me a clue to the way forward: I needed to think about what I really wanted. My core desire is to see what can be seen in the night sky, for no other reason than because it's _there_. But beyond this there's a philosophical consolation in staring at things that shone long before I was born and will keep shining long after I die. Additionally there's the ambient experience of the nocturnal world - hearing the snuffling of hedgehogs, the yowling of cats, the hooting of owls, the chirruping of crickets, the incoherent shouting of drunks, and the whooshing of sports cars. Then there's the masochistic charm of freezing one's fingers on a frosty night, and the pleasant relief of eventually returning into indoors warmth. Or staying alert to the pin prick attacks of sandflies or mosquitos during sultry summer evenings.

A further positive is the modest cardio exercise to be gained from lugging equipment up stairs and steps, into and then out of cars, along paths, and then reversing the process at the end of the evening. There's even some yogic stretching through the labour of orienting  a telescope and stooping to stare into an eyepiece. And if one were inclined (as I suspect most amateur astronomers wouldn't be), one could claim there is a sort of wellness component to observing the night sky. In any event, factoring all these aspects, it seemed obvious that what I really wanted was to do everything I had done as a kid but with a bigger telescope.

How big? Go large, or should I set my sights on something more modest? Whenever I'd contemplated astronomy-in-retirement I had always expected to spend a good few thousands on a top of the line reflector with a go-to mount. Should I just invest in such a setup now? To her credit my wife was kind enough not to pour cold water on this idea when I tried it out on her, but my own inner Presbyterian is instinctively against immodest expenditure. It helps, too, that after my experiences as a 12 year old I'm quite suspicious of complex telescope mounts. Go-tos sound good, but you have to spend a good few minutes polar aligning them each session before you can commence observing. Additionally the prospect of electronics and motors left me leery. I imagine that by now they're reasonably reliable, but how well would they work in ten years. New Zealand doesn't have a strong telescope maintenance community.

All up, I settled on getting a Newtonian telescope with a Dobsonian mount, a combination called a Dobsonian telescope for short. Dobsonian mounts are very simple and low tech and require little maintenance.

That said, there are downsides to Dobsonians. They:

- generally (there are exceptions) don't have tracking motors, so are not appropriate for astrophotography, though they can can do short exposure imaging of bright objects such as the moon and the planets.
- tend to have low focal ratios, which make high magnification views harder to obtain. This means they're better for looking at larger deep sky objects like nebulae and star clusters, and not so good for high magnification views of planets or double stars.
- are primarily for visual observing. A high focal ratio catadioptric telescope with a motorised tracker can be used just as well for observing as astrophotography, albeit with narrower fields of view. The penalty for (mostly) having your cake and eating it is that you pay a premium for the privilege. It's important to note that visual observing is a very different experience to astrophotographic imaging (see Appendix II below).

I was happy to accept these drawbacks. Note though that it took quite a bit of research to work these things out. I'm embarrassed to say I spent more time doing due diligence on my telescope than I have when buying a house.

Having settled on buying a Dobsonian, two questions remained. The first was: how big of a telescope should I get? (The wider the aperture of a telescope's lens or mirror, the more light it can capture and therefore the better the image you will see through it.) I wanted something substantially larger than 4", but I didn't want something so big I couldn't fit it in my car. Additionally, the price of newtonian telescopes don't scale in a linear fashion: a 12" reflector costs three times as much as a 6" reflector. Factoring all these things in I calculated the optimal size to be 8", which would provide 4 times the light-gathering power of my old 4" - plenty enough of a size jump to make the enterprise worthwhile.

The final question was where to obtain the scope. The impression I have from astronomy magazines is that of the anglophone countries the UK and Canada/US (and to probably a lesser degree Australia) have a thriving amateur astronomy scene with a robust second hand market. Whether it's because of a lack of scale or relative per-capita indifference to the heavens, New Zealand just doesn't have that. Vendor-wise I seemed to have two choices: Jacob's Digital (I feel like Jacob's was around in the 80s but I may be misremembering) and Astronz, a vendor owned by the Auckland Astronomical Society.

Jacob's retails a dizzying variety of gear, whereas Astronz has a much more streamlined catalogue. In fact they almost exclusively sell Astronz badged telescopes made by Guang Sheng Optical (GSO), a Taiwanese manufacturer (in truth the telescopes retailed by most well known brands are sourced from Chinese manufacturers). I'm usually suspicious of no-name brands, but I had a feeling the Auckland Astronomical Society would be embarrassed to be selling tat, so assumed that despite being "offbrand", Astronz's telescopes would be at least be solid if not spectacular. And so in June 2020 I shelled out $800, for a telescope 4 times as powerful.



As it's turned out I'm really happy with my purchase. Having only had experience of two telescopes I can't say the optics of the mirror and eyepieces are exquisite, but to my eye the image is crisp, and I'm usually impressed by what I see. The alt-azimuth mount is a dream to operate compared to my old equatorial. The finder scope actually finds things, and my stellar atlas is no longer a limited handbook but the Android app Stellarium, which runs on my phone in night mode and can be zoomed to any practical scale I desire.

This last feature is probably the most significant of all. In the app I can find an object, select it and view text from its wikipedia page in app. Having all this information to hand greatly enhances my viewing sessions. It's like having a genuine Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.

So what have I seen? Well, Jupiter and its moons were discernable but remote with the 4"; with the 8" I can see cloud bands and the Great red spot. In fact the planet is almost a bit too bright, and I'm pondering getting a colour filter to reduce the brightness and improve the contrast.

Star clusters are like scattered piles of jewels. The nebulae of Sagittarius (Lagoon, Trifid, Swan) aren't just grey smudges but plumes of white fire, each with their own distinct character. The Carina nebula is a great tangle of light and shadow. I'll have to wait for the southern summer to see the Orion nebula, but I'm looking forward to it. So far the loveliest sight of all has been Saturn. The rings are of course the planet's chief beauty, but what I like is its mellow golden colour. It's true that this is the planet's and the rings' natural hue, but there's a quality about them that feels like the sunlight shining on them has lost its intensity and become almost buttery. I get a real sense of distance staring at that planet that the monstrous disk of Jupiter doesn't convey.

I hope I have conveyed some of my renewed enthusiasm for astronomy. My tweenage astronomy experience was always tinged with frustration and even a slight melancholy. Not this time. I know what I'm doing now, and it's great!

This is all I wanted to say about how I bought my second telescope, but I do have some further thoughts and musings that are compiled below.



Appendix I - But wait, I want more

I'm very happy with my telescope, but as with golfing and fishing there are plenty of accessories an enthusiast may blow cash on if they so desire. And I'm totally up for it. Indeed I have a suspicion that as well as the initial outlay for the scope, I'm at risk of spending the same amount again on accessories to enhance the experience.

The best way to blow more money is buying eyepieces, or the glassy bit on the telescope you stare into. Different lenses have different magnifications and fields of view. My scope came with a wide field 30mm focal length 2" lens, and a narrow field 9mm focal length Plossl lens. The 30mm is good for looking at large dimmer things like DSOs, and the 9mm is better for small, bright objects like planets. I felt it might be useful to have a lens inbetween, so I made a followup purchase from Astronz of their 15mm 1.25" lens. The 9mm is the most magnification I'd want on a DSO, but I feel for planets there's room at the bottom for an additional 6mm lens. I've read conflicting advice on this, with some amateurs saying they never use their lenses of that size and others saying they're a necessity. It may be down to the focal ratios on their scopes. If I take that plunge I'll go for an eyepiece with a wider apparent field of view, which makes viewing a bit more comfortable. Not so cheap, but easier to user.

I've also already sprung for a variable polarising filter for lunar observation, and an Optolong UHC (ultra high contrast) light pollution filter. The moon can get quite bright staring at it through a wide aperture telescope, so the polarising filter operates as a pair of sunglasses. As the name suggests you can vary the amount of shade the filter provides, useful given the varying phases of the moon.

As for the UHC filter, I live in a small city of 300,000 people so light pollution is a bit of an issue. The chief effect of light pollution is to brighten the sky, which makes it harder for eyes to distinguish fainter objects, and lower contrast views of brighter objects. Standard light pollution filters block the light frequencies of traditional street lighting bulbs, but modern LED lighting (which my city has) radiates at multiple frequencies: red, green, and blue. I opted instead for the UHC filter allowing only light frequencies produced by nebulae to pass through it. I've found this filter to be indispensible for observing nebulae, though it's not without its downsides (it makes stars less bright and provides a colour tint to the image). But I'm satisfied it does the job it was bought to do.

What else? Well, ventually I'll probably buy an adapter for our DSLR, and have a go at some planetary photography.

Once I've worked through this program of expenditure and have done a few seasons of observing, I forsee a future where I've gotten what I can out of the 8" and I'll hunger for more. (Already I have a suspicion the time it takes to outgrow the 8" may be similar to how long it took me to outgrow the 4".) For practical reasons a 12" is probably the largest Dob I'd get, and that only provides double the light of the 8". That would be worthwhile but a bit less revolutionary than the upgrade from 4" to 8". If I wanted to take it further from there I'd probably have to bite the bullet and blow a few grand on an SC/M/RC scope with a motorised mount. I suspect I'd fall back to 8" as 12" SC/M/RC scopes are heavy and require grunty mounts to support them. Future me can worry about those details.



Appendix II - Visual observing vs astrophotography


We're all familiar with images of blazing nebulae and galaxies, so there's an understandable perception that if you stare through an amateur telescope you'll be able to see the same thing. Lamentably it's not like that; you only get those sorts of pictures with astrophotography - when viewed in a backyard telescope, DSOs simply aren't bright enough for the eye to perceive colour, and while you can see major details, the more subtle filigree of incandescent gas and roiling shadow is unobtainable. Unfortunately vision is a continuous processing, sampling small amounts of light at any instant. Cameras have the advantage of being able to build up an exposure over long periods until the required illumination has been gatherd.

So, visual observation may be disappointing for newcomers not prepared for it. Some, especially those with a photography background may prefer to focus on astrophotography. But philosophically and aesthetically, I believe visual observing is still worth doing and provides a deeper understanding of an object that you would otherwise be aware of.

Firstly, by viewing an object with your eyes you get a better intuition of the relative brightness its features, which you lose with astrophotography. This is because with a long exposure the brightest features of a nebula get washed out. Here's a case in point: the Carina nebula contains a famous star (now believed to be a pair of stars) called Eta Carinae. It's one of the largest stars known and a major component of the nebula. But in photographs it's hidden because it's in the brightest part of the nebula and is obscured in long exposure photographs. When I reacquainted myself with the nebula through my new telescope I was met with a baleful orange eye peering at me out of a sea of curling mist, and I was momentairly baffled. I didn't remember a bright orange star in the many photos of the nebula I'd seen. Then I realised, oh right, that's Eta Carinae, the heart of the Carina nebula, the star no photograph will show you.

Here's another example. This is an exquisite wide field picture of the constellation Orion within which is embedded the vast Orion molecular cloud, which contains the Great Nebula of Orion, the famous Horsehead nebula, the Flame nebula, and on the left, the tinea-like red expanse known as Barnard's loop. The image is a genuine work of art and it is impressive, but it's deceptive. While it is a representation of reality, it's that can never be perceived with human eyes.

Nevertheless in no way are the results of astrophotography are inauthentic, but they depict a kind of hyperreality. What I'm attempting to argue is that the _experience_ of visual observing, however inferior it might be, remains a worthy pursuit. is This is not to denigrate the efforts of astrophotographers, but more to argue that while visual observing may seem superficially less impressive, you get a better sense of the scale of astronomy in pursuing it.

What other justifications can I make for visual astronomy? How about this: even from the backyard you can follow in the footsteps of some of the greatest scientists in history: Galileo, Cassini, Huygens, the Herschel family. Every time you the small circular blur of a globular cluster, you get a sense of the frustration of Charles Messier, hunting for comets must have felt. Was this a new comet or another DSO? He'd have to check back in a day or two. If it had moved, hooray, it's a comet! If it hasn't he'd have to add it to his list of things to ignore.

I doubt anyone sufficiently interested in astronomy to get into astrophotography hasn't looked through a telescope; I guess this message is for anyone who has bought a scope and been disappointed they didn't see Hubble telescope style Pillars of Creation. The ghostly world of visual observing is worth pursuing precisely because it is different.



Appendix III - The phallic nature of telescopes


Apologies for the immaturity, but I have to get this out. Returning to astronomy in middle age, I'm struck by how Freudian the business is. As a rather innocent 12 year old I didn't pick up on it at all, but I sure do now.

Firstly, there's no getting over the fact that telescopes are long and cylindrical, and they are usually aligned fairly erectly. Telescope apertures are routinely (if anachronistically) measured in inches, and you can't bandy around a phrase like 'my 8 inch Newtonian' without some feeling of saisfaction.

Eyepieces, too, are cylindral and therefore at least mildly phallic. Most lenses are 1.25 inches wide, so they're a little pathetic, but my 30mm lens is 2" wide, and grasping it I feel an strange sense of satisfaction. It's got heft.

You might be starting to wonder if my interest in astronomy may somehow be an attempt to compensate for being inadequate in the trouser department. Despite being phallic I don't think a telescope projects vigour the way a sports car or an electric guitar do. More's the pity! Still, I'm not sure I'd like to meet a woman excited by a man's 8" Newtonian. Especially given that (sweeping characteristion that will no doubt offend many but which is still fundamentally true) astronomers tend towards the unkempt, sandals-with-socks end of he social spectrum.

I think that's enough.


Appendix IV - Under dark skies


