---
layout: post
title: Maxima
---

I was introduced to Boards of Canada in 1998 by my friend Michael (who has introduced me to many of the things I write about). He lent me the group's first LP, the recently-released Music Has the Right to Children. On first listen I'm afraid I took an immediate dislike to what I heard. Large swathes of the album were given over to listless hiphop instrumentals, which I found dreary. Other tracks were given over to syrupy synths.

Ok, so not a fan. But more than this I disliked how the music was navel-gazing and backward-looking. This might seem odd since I've written a bunch of essays about 70s and 80s electronica, but my interest is in the sound as it was then, not "retro" regurgitations of it. (How I feel about the more recent synthwave movement is absolutely unprintable.)

My anomie _might_ have made sense on its own terms, but it was heavily bolstered by my growing bitterness at changing trends in electronica at the time. See, through the mid 90s I'd been reasonably invested in the UK Rave/ambient scene (well, less the rave and more the ambient, though the two went hand in hand). What I liked about those styles was a sense of future and possibility. I _think_ this was born out of the we're-not-going-to-be-annhilated-after-all euphoria at the end of the Cold War in 1990 (at the very least that's the association I have with it). But in the mid 90s rave/ambient stalled. The UK 1994 Criminal Justice Act put paid to Rave, which descended into Ministry of Sound blandness. I'm not certain about what happened to ambient; the peak year in terms of album greatness was 1994. I don't know whether the subsequent decline was due to the genre being played out, or whether chillout rooms were no longer a thing, but the shiny progressive Utopian spirit of 90s ambient faded away, and the nearest thing to a replacement was backward-looking, mopey triphop.

Which is sort of where BoC comes in. Were they really a triphop group? Yeah? Nah? Does it matter? In any event, I was having anything to do with the brothers Sandison in 1998. But three years later, in a more conciliatory mood, I tried listening to the album again. This time I identified a handful of songs I liked: Roygbiv, Aquarius, Olson. I was still a bit leery of it; and definitely couldn't commit to it wholeheartedly.

Then an important moment came in 2002 when my grandfather died, and for whatever reason on the day of his funeral I had the bittersweet tune Olson stuck in my head. It wasn't the sort of thing to really associate with Granddad at all (he would have preferred a bit of Vaughn Williams), but it stuck with me. The trap was starting to close...

A few months later I heard some music in a cafe and was intrigued enough to I ask what it was. "The new Boards of Canada album," was the reply. When I eventually got my hands on this new record I found that while again there were a handlefulfew tracks that were intriguing (my favourite is The Beach at Red Point), mostly the album was bit chaotic, although an interlude with Leslie Neilsen was pretty funny.

The years tumbled on. In 2005 The Campfire Head Phase came out. I didn't really like this one at all. The only one I can remember offhand is Dayvan Cowboy, which was way too sappy and raucous for my liking.

So reaching the end of the 2000s I'd given BoC a fair go, but I'd have to say of five tracks genuinely liked from three albums was a pretty meagre return. Even so, those five tracks I really found quite compelling (more on this later). What changed for me is one day on my company's highly illegal music server I discovered a BoC collection called Maxima. It was from a casette demo from the mid 90s. (Most of the tracks were to feature "officially" on later EPs and Music has the Right to Children. )

What's odd about Maxima is that although it features many of the same listless, dull tracks from MHTRTC, somehow the sequencing works to their benefit. It helps that there are a few tracks with more momentum (such as Niagara and Red Moss) which help things along. All up, after a decade of vacillation, Maxima made me into a genuine BoC fan. Indeed BoC is about the only act with whom I've had such a tortured journey before liking.

At the same time I also discovered the 2000 EP A Beautiful Place in the Country, which I enjoyed, and revisiting MHTRTC, for the first time I appreciated Eagle in Your Mind, Telephasic Workshop, and Pete Standing Alone.

What about my musicological disdain in 1998? Well, for a few years I held on to the idea that electronica had lost its way, but eventually my mind changed. There were a number of factors. By the early 2000s I'd become aware that ambient hadn't died, it had been hagnging out in Germany all along, and (for the most part) doing better than it had during the chillout era. The retro/exotica phase of electronica had burned out also, to be replaced by Glitch (which whatever you might think of that genre, was at least something sort of new). But most importantly I got older and stopped being so fiercely invested in the music of the early 90s.

2009 through 2012 became for me my peak obsession with Boards of Canada. Obviously I'd come to appreciate the 70s sound of the group, but another factor was that I found the band's music was a gateway to memories of my own childhood. I've read of other fans experiencing this same phenomenon, with BoC recalling their often miserable 70s and 80s childhoods. Mine was pretty benign, and BoC more brought to mind extinct media like filmstrips, or wonky film projectors displaying dated public service shorts in classrooms with windows lined with blackout paper. It was uncanny the way BoC managed to resurrect those memories in me. Well, the use of National Film Board of Canada and PBS films in their tracks obviously had something to do with it. The Sandison brothers are four years older than me, but this relatively small age gap (or perhaps the dated nature age of school media available in my school in the early 80s) means I share their points of reference.

I think going into my mid thirties my own childhood was becoming remote and mysterious and privileged, in a way. You know, "pity kids these days have only Spongebob and Dora, we had motherfucking Bagpuss". It's perhaps not coincidental that during the time I was also into the media-analysis comedy of Charlie Brooker, who is the same age as the Sandersons, and has a similar preoccupation with the 1970s and 80s.

It's tempting to wonder if there's something about Gen X or the 70s that's susceptible to this sort of nostalgia. I guess artefacts like Sha Na Na and Wordsworth's Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood suggest otherwise. But suffice it to say I remained continually intrigued by the BoC world.

Ironic then that I didn't catch up with the group's 2013 album, Tomorrow's Harvest, until three years later. (How did I manage that? Well, they didn't release stuff very often, and I wasn't conditioned to expect anything new from them.) I find Tomorrow's Harvest - one of the bleakest works I've heards, to be BoC's masterpiece; certainly their best since MHTRTC. It's a queasy and uneasy album which I first heard around the same time I saw the first season of Stranger Things (also a queasy and uneasy piece of retro), and now in my head the two are inextricably linked.

I knew the album owed much to dystopian SF soundtracks, but I didn't understand just how much until I watched George A. Romero's Day of the Dead and heard a music cue that made me think (putting the horse before the card), "that sounds like Boards of Canada".

The group hasn't put out any new music for a decade now and you have to wonder how the Sandison brothers feed themselves. Four albums in 25 years shows admirable restraint, I suppose.  But if you don't release new music or perform, do you really exist at all? (Could it be the brothers actually have day jobs working in the town planning department of a city council somewhere?) If they are working full time on BoC, what do they do day to day. It's not as if their tracks are very complex, even if the sound is very precise.

Looking at it another way, it's possible they've already said all want to say, but if they want to release more, I'd be interested in hearing it.

What of other acts in the genre Simon Reynolds has called "hauntology", such as the various Ghostbox acts from the 2000s? Well, they got the tone right, but the vibe was a bit too arch ("Belbury Poly", indeed), and not nearly as accessible.

The BoC spell on me has worn off somewhat in recent times. The cause? Well, my son has reached the age I was when I developed the memories that I now associate with BoC. Watching the world through his eyes, I sense he'll find this time in his life intriguing as well. So it's not the 70s it's more the time of life and the distance from it. Admittedly the analogue technology to hand in the 70s (film, tape of various kinds) is something that no longer exists, and perhaps that creates some mystique, but otherwise, I'd say every time is special for those who grow up during it.