---
layout: post
title: Cricket!
---

Where to start? Well, I played cricket as a kid for three seasons from 82/83 to 84/85. I played for Onslow club; I think the team for at least one season was called the Dekkas, after the street in Ngaio. I have fond memories of Saturday mornings, white shirt, white shorts, smell of cut grass, and all that... My three seasons had diminishing returns, going south when I graduated to hard ball cricket and having to contend with other kids menacing me with hard projectiles. Now 9 and 10 year olds aren't routinely bouncing throat-high balls at you, but they were capable of perilously high full tosses. What's more, helmets weren't provided, so while I'll freely concede my timidity, it's not like there wasn't risk.

It's been good to watch Angus contend with hard ball cricket with more equanimity than I did.

That's the extent of my playing career. Onto my career as a cricket follower. My viewing career started in the summer of 1982/83, when I was old enough to stay up and watch the "World Series" Cup competition, played each summer in Australia. Over there a revolution had taken place in the late 70s after media mogul Kerry Packer enacted a hostile takeover on the sport and injected colourful uniforms and technical innovations like playing under lights and displaying an amusing animation of an angry duck whenever anyone got out without scoring.

The enduring thing I liked about the WSC was the uniforms. It seems hilarious to admit it now, but I was obsessed with the New Zealand beige and brown uniform. It was already an Age of Beige - see also: the uniforms in Battlestar Galactica - but there was something mesmerising about it. It looked so much better than the garish yellow and green of the Australian uniform (though I'd have to say that the best uniform of the era was the maroon and lavender of the West Indian team). I'm not alone with the beige fixation: in the early 2000s these colours had a renaissance when adopted by the "Beige Brigade" NZ cricket fan club, a rowdy collection of Gen X reprobates.

I don't want to linger too much on uniforms, but it's worth pointing out how much better they are than today's jobs. Firstly, they were made in simple combinations of two colours, without elaborate designs or sponsor's logos. Second, the trousers still had a bit of a flare at the cuffs, which made them pretty groovy (and often they sported a lovely sharp crease!). Flatteringly, slimming patches of darker colour were placed over the sides of the shirts, cunningly flattering the less sculptured physiques of 80s players. Colourwise, it wasn't just the NZ uniforms that looked good. The simplicity of the strip makes it much more memorable than uniforms today.

Also more memorable were the players. You have to understand that in the early 1980s the game in New Zealand and Australia was still amateur. Physiques were chunkier, and bowling pace was slower, and scoring rates more sedate. In 1983 Lance Cairns was lorded for hitting six sixes in a match; in 2025 Finn Allen hit 16 sixes in a T20 international to only a fraction of the excitement.

If the game play was less intensive than today the character of the players was a good deal more flavourful. The Australians sported bullyboy paceman Dennis Lillee (lovely action, lovely moustache), the dishevelled and podgy keeper Rod Marsh (lovely moustache), and the grinning assassin Jeff Thompson (or Thommo, as he was frequently known). The New Zealand players didn't have quite the same hardness of personality, but you had "the mantis" Jeremy Coney, nominally a batsman, but more memorable for his elusive slow paced swing bowling. Then there was Lance Cairns, an unorthodox medium pacer (bowled off the wrong the foot) who got a lot of swing. He got even more swing when batting, using a small-looking but heavy club nicknamed Excalibur, which he used to nonchalantly bludgeon sixes at the MCG. Then you had Ewan Chatfield, the nagging fast medium bowler, usually bowling back of a length. Hard to get away. Less of a personality but certainly a commanding presence was the great Richard Hadlee, nicknamed Paddles on account of his huge feet.



So it's 1983 and we're watching live TV of Australia, two hours behind us, playing cricket at night. I'm watching in a dressing gown. There are big crowds - people had less to do in those days - so the noise is exciting. Then there's the Australian commentary team of Kerry Packer's Channel Nine. The commentators ranged from the slightly buffoonish Bill Lawry and Tony Greig, through the vaguely sullen Ian Chappell through to Richie Benaud, the gold standard in cricket commentary for more than 40 years. He's the commentary equivalent of a gin and tonic. These giants of... explaining what's happening (or, failing that, making shit up) were so memorable they were lampooned to great comic effect by The 12th Man.

What of the cricket? Well, following the New Zealand cricket team in the 80s was a bit of a rollercoaster. Since the mid 70s the team had been on a gradually upward trajectory, winning with increasing frequency after decades of being perennial no-hopers. There team in 82/83 had two genuinely good players Richard Hadlee, Glenn Turner (Martyn Crowe would arrive the following season). But more compelling to me were the "character" journeymen with a bit of personality, one of whom was always guaranteed to put in a decent performance each game: Lance Cairns was strong as an ox and deaf as a post, wielder of a very heavy bat called excalibur, and able to wallop sixes at the Melbourne Cricket Ground (the world's biggest) with ease. Ewen Chatfield, a precise if not particularly threatening bowler, amusingly known as the "Naenae Express". His chief charm was his uniquely unskilled batting, so bad every time he managed to face a ball without getting out onlookers would cheer. Then there was lanky Jeremy Coney, an indifferent batter and bowler of slow rubbish who seemed there more for his personality than anything else.

This was not a team that seemed particularly promising, but it was capable of clawing victory from the jaws of defeat. And so it was in the 1982/83 WSC. NZ got into the finals ahead of the much classier English team. They lost 2-0 in the finals but Cairns hit six sixes in the second final (relatively common now, but back then completely outlandish), managing (sort of) to dredge some pride back from defeat.

The 80s progressed with me glued to the screen whenever the NZ team played. There were numerous highlights but the chief triumphs were defeating England and Australia in away test series. The Australian victories were particularly sweet, although I later learned that the Australian side was heavily depleted because of a rebel tour to South Africa.

The golden age for NZ cricket ended gradually in the late 80s as the tinnier players (Cairns, Coney, Chatfield) retired and were replaced with lesser "talent". Hadlee and Martin Crowe were the true class players in the team, and after Hadlee retired without a strong successor (sorry Danny Morrison!) the team started to decline. By the early 90s the test team were at the mercy of just about everyone, with Pakistan's Wasim and Waqar in particular helping themselves to plenty of wickets. The 1992 world cup on local soil allowed one last tilt at greatness (cruelly thwarted by an unfancied Pakistan in the semi final) and the team faded into mediocrity in the mid 90s.

NZ cricket entered a wilderness for approximately 20 years. There were always players in the team capable of pulling off remarkable feats, it's just the frequency of them was insufficient to allow the team to win with any consistency. Injury was also a problem (I'm heartbroken Shane Bond didn't get more of a go). So there were brief periods of greatness (including some very competitive series against the aussies in the early 2000s followed by a lot of rubbish. The decline coincided with cricket not being broadcast on terrestrial TV, so I could only watch when I visited my parents. Inevitably I gave up following.

The nadir came in the late 2000s when batting stocks were so low and coaching so lamentable that spinning wunderkind Dan Vettori was simultaneously the best bowler and batter, as well as effectively being team coach. It's a shame that he and long-time almost great but not quite there batsman-captain Stephen Fleming were stranded with a team of largely no-hopers.

Well, it all changed in the early 2010s when the team found itself with half a dozen decent players: bowlers Southee and Boult, opener Latham, batsman Ross Taylor, wicketkeeper BJ Watling, captain and slogger McCullum, and, jewel in the crown, Kane Williamson.

I'm in love with Kane. He's what New Zealand's needed since Martin Crowe retired. He's not as graceful to watch as Crowe, but he's more careful and disciplined - the D word being the perennial quality New Zealand batsmen have lacked.

From 2014 to 2021 the NZ team were, if not formidable, then deserving of respect. Brendon McCullum was a player of the earlier crappier era, but he led with total commitment and was instrumental in engineering the new golden age. Ross Taylor would have been the standout batsman of any NZ era who had the misfortune to be largely overshadowed by Williamson. The bowlers were solid without quite making the level of greatness. Compared to the 80s NZ team the 10s one had more assured talent, if less personality - save for the lion-hearted bruiser Neil Wagner, instrumental in so many victories.

The crowning glory for New Zealand was winning the inaugural test trophy, as well as coming runner up at the 2015 and 2019 world cups (the 2019 loss being so close that I don't think I'll ever recover from it). Yet there were still some missed opportunities. The team didn't manage to defeat Australia in a test (in fact, the most recent victory was an improbable one in 2010 in Australia). South Africa consistently had the wood on NZ too (except in world cups...). Still it's an era with many happy memories.

When the current crop of greats retires, are we doomed to a new dark age? Yeah probably.


You get the odd bloke like Shane Warne, who had enough charm for you to love him even though he was a larrikin. Types like the phlegmatic Alan Border and Steve Waugh you could at least respect. But then you get arseholes like Ponting or Michael Clarke, or boofheads like David Warner. On the fast bowling side things aren't much better: there's the legendary hard men like Lillee and Thompson, the unlovely spiv Jeff Lawson, the frankly mean Glenn McGrath, the preposterous Mitchell Johnson.




# The falling out of love

Despite the 90s being a dreadful period for NZ cricket I continued following along. A major impediment to my cricket consumption was moving out of home and not havinng Sky TV, which had TV rights to cricket for the better part of 30 years (and will soon have them again). It's hard to know what would have turned off more cricket punters: losing free to air access or the performance of the team. I ended up following games via the Cricinfo website. There were some series I tuned into more actively. I followed the NZ tour to England in 1999 (NZ winning 2-1 in a series universally recognised as England cricket's rock bottom), the NZ tour of Australia in 2000/2001 that signalled the rise of Shane Bond. I managed to watch live Nathan Astle hitting 222 against the poms. But that was pretty much it. The NZ team during this period had its moments, but it was pretty random too. After the retirement of long time captain and century-phobic batsman Stephen Fleming, there was a brief period when the batting lineup was held up by bowling all-rounder Daniel Vettori - from number 8.

# Return

I fell back in love with cricket in 2010-11 watching the Ashes series in Australia. Since ruination at the hands of NZ in 1999 the England team had rebuilt itself and won Ashes series in England in 2005 and 2009. Victory in Australia, however, had eluded them since 1987. For the 2010 tour England brought a team with enough firepower, ambition, and belief to make an impact. It was the first five test series I'd followed since the 1992-93 West Indies tour of Australia when Curtly Ambrose slaughtered the ockers.

I was able to watch this Ashes series because I had a summer to myself in NZ while Sally was in the UK. (This was because she was there on a working holiday visa, while I was too old to qualify.) I could watch the Ashes at my parents' house, but I was also living near my work which had a Sky subscription (because we streamed Trackside racing audio over the internet). So it was that in weekends Catalyst's cleaners and I would watch the cricket in the boardroom.

England won the series 3 - 1, with the misery heaped on Australia rising worsening as the series progressed. The Aussies were far from hopeless, but they were consistently outclassed by the poms - everyone in that squad had a moment where they shined. My favourite player was the very tall pace bowler Chris Tremlett, memorably nicknamed the "man-mountain" by the Channel 9 team. It seemed like that England team would be in the ascendency for years, but it only lasted perhaps another season. Nonetheless England put the nadir of the 1990s (poor old Mike Atherton, Alec Stewart, et al).

# Golden years

Speaking of nadirs, what of New Zealand? Well, by the early 2010s there was a lot of green shoots. Keeper Brendon McCullum had become a full time batsman, a one-note walloper capable of large scores but just as likely to get out quickly doing something stupid. Ross Taylor had come into his own, along with Martin Guptill. There was also Kane Williamson, a meticulous studen of the game who patiently accumulated runs. On the bowling front things were a little more fluid, with Tim Southee being the chief hope for the future, but NZ has always had a pool of capable seamers (though I will say the period when the game but hardly menacing Chris Martin was our premier strike bowler was a slightly desperate one). It was the batting that was looking exciing, for a change.

Daniel Vettori handed over captaincy to Ross Taylor, but victories weren't forthcoming and new coach Mike Hesson reckoned his Otago buddy Brendon McCullum would be a better captain, and Taylor got rolled. This led to a big stink in the media. It was a genuine tragedy. Hesson was probably right, but Taylor deserved a decent go, and he was denied. It wasn't a black mark against him, but his career forever felt less joyful and triumphant than it otherwise should have been, given his talent and achievements.

Then came McCullum's first tour as captain, an away series in South Africa in early 2012. In the first test New Zealand were bowled out for 45. Now 45 isn't great, but it's not unheard of. The media and NZ public, already viewing proceedings with a jaundiced eye thanks to the McCullum captaincy imbroglio, were furious. As McCullum tells it, this humiliation was taken as an opportunity to reset the team and begin rejuvenation. I don't quite buy that - as I've mentioned the green shoots were already there, they just needed to be given time. However the legend was born.

The ascension began reasonably soon. NZ stopped losing at home, and gave a good showing overseas. The only teams that could reliably beat NZ was the Australians and the South Africans. NZ made two world cup finals; the first was a fiasco but the second left the country agonisingly close to victory. Along with batsmen new bowlers rose: Trent Boult joined Southee in opening the attack, arguably NZ's first pace duo comparable to Lillee and Thompson or Wasim and Waqar. Then there was Neil Wagner: on paper he was too short, too slow, and didn't move the ball enough, but he was a bowling machine and had an unerring knack of troubling batters with the short stuff. Best of all Wagner played with heart on his sleeve, bellowing like a stricken wildebeest when he took a wicket. These three bowlers became the bedrock of the NZ bowling attack for the better part of 10 years.

Eventually McCullum retired. His triumphal moment was scoring the first NZ triple century in tests. He deserved it, though by golly he served up a lot of catches the Indians seemed reluctant to take. 12 runs behing him, but much more impressive was Ross Taylor's 290 against Australia, the highest score by a visitor on Australian soil.

Kane Williamson became captain. I wasn't that keen as I feared it might affect his batting. I think it probably did a bit, but Williamson proved to have been a good understudy, and the latter part of the 2010s were a high water mark, capped off with the 2021 World Test Championship victory. I will say that NZ were lucky to get to that final, affected as it was by Covid. But once there the victory over India was convincing. After two near World Cup misses NZ definitely deserved.

I should say more about Kane. NZ has had any number of wood chopping batsmen who give it plenty of stick and then flash at one outside off and get nicked out. Against the standard argument that test cricket is about attrition and often gritting it out on a surface that's holding up or doing to much. The excuse that's often trotted out is that it's better for batters to "play their natural game" - attack the ball rather than waiting to be picked off.