This excursion takes me on a retrospective of my 12-ish years and counting journey through K-pop.

I'd had some exposure to Korean culture through dramas and variety shows, but my interest in K-pop began when Gangnam style came out in 2012. Initially I was drawn more to the video's cameo by variety emperor Yu Jae-Suk's cameo than I was by the song, but as Gangnam Style rapidly became a global phenomenon I figured I should go all in, or at least play my part in getting the video to 1 billion views on YouTube by the end of 2012.

My dalliance wth K pop might have ended there, but in late 2012 my work colleague Levon, who had introduced me to Gangnam Style, turned me on to SNSD's Flower Power.

Backing up a bit, SNSD (or Girl's Generation to less refined folk) was the flagship 9(!)-piece girl group managed by K pop powerhouse SM Entertainment. Flower Power was a Japanese-language EDM single, and an absolutely thunderous track electronic that has - to me - the urgent feel of the KLF's venerable warhorse What Time is Love?

Unfortunately none of SNSD's other singles had the same intensity (that said, I'm quite fond of Mr Taxi and Run Devil Run). Indeed it became quickly apparent to me that most K pop wasn't my cup of tea at all. The problem was this: the boy groups tend to produce non-threatening but occasionally swaggery New Jack Swingish R&B. To this day my Spotify Kpop collection has one song by a boy group: Big Bang's Fantastic Baby (though, full disclosure, there's also a solo song by Big Bang's G Dragon).

Girl groups tend to have more stylistic variety. In the main it's R&B but there's also a bit of EDM, hip hop, and what I'd describe as whimsical jazzy folksy study music. What's with this gender divide? I think the explanation for this is that boy bands sell best when they're blandly handsome and musically unthreatening, whereas girl groups have to work harder to get attention, and therefore are more likely to produce music I find interesting.

In the main it's EDM singles that I am primarily drawn to. An absolutely classic example is 2NE1's ununderstated I Am the Best. (If you want to keep count, in the early 2010s 2NE1 was SNSD's main rival, give or take a Wondergirl or two)

So far I could only find one interesting song per group, but that would change when I discovered f(x), the younger stablemates of SNSD. This five piece group's singles tended to be dance tracks, with plenty of bangers: NU ABO, Electric Shock, Rum Pum Pum Pum (featuring the band performing in Tartan, with member Krystal even sporting a [Tam o' Shanter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tam_o%27_shanter_(cap)); no one's protesting _that_ cultural appropriation).  Finally, perhaps the greatest of them all, is the apocalyptic Red Light. 

Though not quite in the category of high drama EDM songs that I enjoyed most, I also discovered more irreverant groups like Crayon Pop (the loopy Bar Bar Bar being their chief triumph) and the tongue in cheek Orange Caramel, who produced the wry disco number Catallena, and My Copycat, which sports a Where's Wally-themed video. My Copycat's arrangment feels very close to [We No Speak Americano](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7E9Ed9DUQoQ), which makes me wonder if the title is an acknowledgement of its own derivativeness. (Alternatively, there seems to be a whole genre of house beats over mid century latin jazz, so it's hard to say.) In any event I can think of nothing that sums the Orange Caramel better than this performance of [Catallena](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GKU1oA7TxUM) with drinks perched on the girls' heads.

Around 2016 my interest in K things petered away. 2NE1 imploded when one of their members had a very minor drugs scandal, and f(x), SNSD, and Orange Caramel all declined. As well as hearing less music I liked, I was learning about the pointless controversies (one example I can remember is elfin singer IU being accused of paedophilia over a nothing burger). (It struck me at the time that South Korean "netizens" were the most judgemental people in the universe; little did I know that Western social media would also become this way as the decade "progressed".)

More than any of this nonsense, though, I learned about the exploitativeness of the K pop industry, and I felt that my interest-taking made me a little complicit. This decision was only reinforced by the later Black Sun scandal that undid Big Bang, and the profoundly saddening 2019 suicides of Goo Hara of Kara and Sulli of f(x).

But I was brought back to the K pop fold in early 2022 by JoJo's Bizarre Adventure. Now the connection might not seem obvious (even if you know that practically everything is a "JoJo reference"), so let me explain: there's a piece of Japanese software called Miku Miku Dance, which allows you to choreograph animated dancers. At one stage I would regularly trawl YouTube for mindless JoJo content (when I could have been reading War and Peace!), and I found numerous videos of JoJo characters dancing to K pop songs. (Why do these exist? I don't know.) Through watching these I was passively exposed to a new generation of K pop groups.

The first songs that kicked things off weren't wholly K pop. K/DA were a manufactured group comprised of characters from the video game League of Legions (published by US firm Riot Games, but very popular in South Korea). The virtual group were also a sort of super group with singing duties shared by members of the Korean unit G-Idle along with US and Chinese singers.

The history of animated pop groups isn't replete with artistic triumphs. There's the Archies' Sugar Sugar, and Do the Bart Man, and I suppose Gorillaz, though they're a bit too cool for school to be genuinely pop (I guess kids liked them though; OK fine). K/DA's first single, 2018's POP/STARS, was an excellent start: looks great; sounds great. The group (or, should I say, Riot Games) followed up with a second single, More, in 2020, along with (in classic K pop style) a "mini album" called All Out. More is a better song than POP/STARs, I think, though I like the 3D animation style of the video a good deal less.

Again through MMD vids, I discovered K pop superstars Black Pink. They were just getting started when I faded out of K pop in 2016, being YG's successor group to 2NE1. A bit like f(x), Black Pink have had a wonderful run of EDM singles. My favourite is Ddu Ddu Du, but there's a lot of other bangers, like How You Like That, Kill This Love, and Pink Venom. Even quieter songs like Whistle are pretty good. Black Pink have been managed to cross over in the West, culminating in them headlining Coachella in 2022. (Also, at time of writing, Black Pink member Rose has a collab with that fellow Bruno Mars in the US top ten.)

What I like most about Black Pink, and I know this seems very specific and potentially weird, is they're roughly the same height, giving their dance performances a uniformity SNSD could never achieve as there was about a foot's difference in height between tallest and shortest. It shouldn't be important, but in a weird way it makes them feel more _musiker arbeiterly_ - you know, like Kraftwerk.

I first disovered SM Entertainment's Aespa in 2022. Their early songs weren't presplendant with the sort of EDM drama songs that I like, however in 2024 they brought out two masterpieces, Supernova and Armageddon.

The K pop EDM songs I like tend to have lyrics that can be summed up as "I am better than you (and you can't handle it)". By contrast, Supernova is about having the energy of an unstable late-stage red supergiant star (which you also can't handle). The song's pretty decent, but the surreal video is excellent as our ladies of stellar nucleosynthesis cause CG mayhem across a Thai city.

Armageddon isn't quite as energetic as Supernova, but its got a loopy charm (best moment: an abrupt run of "bang chitty bang"s in the lyrics). The weird video is another winner.

It's hard to overemphasise the effect Supernova had on me. It felt like an apotheosis of the K pop sub-genre I like.

Very finally we come to Japanese expat Kpop group XG, and their weird minimalist hiphop outing Woke Up. Again the vid is pretty strange. It's not the sort of electro club banger that I seem to gravitate to, but it's a cool and detached song, and a bit out there. If nothing else, XG are certainly doing their bit for sales of dental accessories. XG have only been around for 18 months and sadly their other songs aren't nearly as interesting, but I'm hoping they might come out with more in future.

[Postscript November 2024: XG released a sequel (or at least a followup in the same vein) called Howling. The song has a similar hard edge, but the video, featuring exquisite costuming and arresting visuals, is a tour de force. If XG were to be the future of girl group K pop (or girl groups generally) that would be fine by me.]

So that's my survey of K pop that I like. I should say that my listening isn't exhaustive; I wouldn't be suprised if was another two dozen songs that I would like if I knew they existed, but my interest doesn't quite reach the threshold for a systematic investigation. The problem is I can't quite put myself through listening through hundreds of K pop songs I won't like to find the small fraction of songs that I will. So I'm afraid my consumption and enjoyment will continue to be a bit haphazard.

I've spent some time wrestling with why I give K-pop the time of day, given it's pretty random (if not downright peculiar) for a middle aged white man to enjoy listening to music mostly sung and performed by young Asian women (*furtive look, mops brow*). In the end, given the internet has exposed us all to a cornucopia of cultural "categories", I guess I've ended up glomming on to something I've found enduringly interesting. Perhaps that sounds too random; what I've found is that the hyper emotional, overwrought nature of K-pop I like works on the same part of my brain that likes say Bauhaus, or glam rock. I also enjoy the electronic production. I like the energy of the music videos, the precision of the choreography (and the plastic surgery), the virtuoso organisational skills to mount world tours and media appearances. There's a lot to appreciate and even like. There.