---
layout: post
title: Bauhaus, in the middle of our street
---

Bauhaus is my rock guilty pleasure. I got madly into them at 17, so enthusiastically in fact that one school chum told me "I used to quite like Bauhaus until you wouldn't shut up about them."

So what kicked it off? Well, it was lunchtime on a cloudy April day in 1992, and we were playing cricket with aluminium bats constructed from decaying guttering from the roof of our school (if that sounds a touch Lord of the Flies, it totally was: our 7th form common room got trashed on multiple occasions). Someone had a stereo and it was playing Bela Lugosi's Dead by Bauhaus, and as we played the sound sort of skittered around the courtyard. I found that intriguing, but what really got me was the guitar solo. Well, I thought it was a guitar - the sound was so abstract it could have been anything. That was the thing that hooked me, though there was a lot else to the song.

The best starting point for understanding Bela Lugosi's Dead is [this interview](https://www.uncut.co.uk/features/bauhaus-on-bela-lugosis-dead-it-was-the-stairway-to-heaven-of-the-1980s-123408/) with the band, published to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the song's release. In case clicking's too hard though, I'll give you a rundown. First you need to know that the band originated in Northampton, England, in 1978. The band's lineup was singer Peter Murphy, guitarist Daniel Ash, bassist David J Haskins, and drummer Kevin Haskins (younger brother of David). Bela Lugosi's Dead was the first song they wrote, and the first they recorded, in early 1979. David J provided the lyrics (he liked old horror movies), Kevin Haskins only knew three drumbeats at the time and chose bossanova(!) for the song. Murphy brought the howling vocals, and Ash contributed weirdly tuned guitar chords as well as his feedback solos. The song structure is simple: the implacable beat pounds away for nine minutes, with no variation; alongside the drums marches a simple, sepulchral bassline. Vocals, guitar and studio fog round out the sound. The song has a sort-of verse/chorus structure, although it might be better to say it has a repeated alternation of groove and bridge.

The contradiction of Bela Lugosi's Dead is that it's both incredibly simple and yet wholly original. I think part of the song's genius is how raw and unformed the band was at the time they wrote it, and informed by very idiosyncratic and disparate influences. Ash's guitar (when playing chords rather than feedback) sounds like country to me, or maybe Velvets-era Lou Reed? Murphy's vocals are just bonkers, varying between baritone muttering and tenor shrieking; they owe more than a little to David Bowie.

But the biggest stylistic influence on the song was reggae. The bossanova beat makes more sense as a choice when you realise it's very close to a reggae steppers beat. David J's dead, harmonic-free bass tone is a clear nod to reggae bass. Finally, the creeping, jittering echoes featured heavily in the song are a mutation of the echoes of dub reggae; even the feedback soloing is essentially a rockish extension of dub.

So the seminal goth rock song owes more to reggae than Bram Stoker. For me this is the apotheosis of the have-a-go punk ethos: play what you like without really knowing what you're doing. In Bauhaus' case they hit upon a new genre.

It's worth pointing out that while Bela Lugosi's Dead might be the first goth rock song, the only aspects that goth groups took from it is the campy lyrical subject matter and the song's doomy atmosphere. The reggae elements (and that bossanova beat) were left behind. Shame really, but reggae is such a distintive (and, if we're honest, _ungothic_) genre that those elements were always going to be jettizoned by those following up.

# Early singles

After Bela Lugosi's Dead sold well, the group got picked up by 4ad and then Beggar's Banquet. They released the singles Dark Entries, Terror Couple Kill Colonel, and Telegram Sam. The latter is a T-Rex cover, and this latter song (and its B side Rosegarden Funeral of Sores, a John Cale cover), revealed another strand of influence on the group: glam rock. Goth rock is a sort of offshoot of glam rock by way of Rocky Horror, Universal's monster movies, and the Hammer Horror studio. My favourite of the three singles though is Terror Couple Kill Colonel, its ponderous, medicated feel being both humorous and unnerving.

# In the Flat Field (1980)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/QclC_wz8tfs" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In the Flat Field is a set of stricken, monstrous songs that - very much in my head only - reminds me of the smell of my 1993-era Doc Marten's boots. If their debut single was largely an exercise in gloomy atmosphere, the songs on In the Flat Field are flashes of flame and adrenal fury. The title song seems to be about wandering around a sex district, similar to the early grubby fascinations of Soft Cell, just with the amp turned to 11. Developing his technique considerably since the Bela bossanova, Haskins provides some thunderous drumming (he was, like many drummers of the era, an acolyte of tomtom loving drummer Budgie from Siouxsie and the Banshee). Hustling bass, furious guitar, vocal keening; an avalanche of a song.

The album has many songs in a similar monochrome vein: God in an Alcove is gloriously weird; Double Dare is terrifyingly intense. Spy in the Cab is a slow-burn meditation with glorious synth boop percussion. Stigmata Martyr is claustrophobic and disquieting. The final song, Nerves, is a sort of Kurt Weil-gone-demonic epic.

So great album then? Well yes, _those_ songs are great, but there's three poorer quality songs (Dive, Small Talk Stinks, and Saint Vitus Dance). Now a ratio of six good to three bad should make for a fair album, but too me the bad are bad enough that they detract from the good. Rather than listen to In the Flat Field, I prefer to listen to the first disc of Bauhaus' "1979-83" compilation, where I can hear the good songs plus the excellent early singles and B-sides.

# Mask (1981)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/k_Mem31cyJs" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

When I was little I found Mask to be quite intimidating. It commences with the highly intense Hair of the Dog and ends with the ultragoth title track. Looking back today, however, the album feels more defined by its uptempo dance(!) tracks: Dancing, Kick in the Eye, and In Fear of Fear. Adding to those songs the doom ballad Hollow Hills and the 12-string epic The Passion of Lovers, you get an album that has fun for the whole family!

# The Sky's Gone Out (1982)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/qLDTfxSSCSM" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Proceedings get a peppy kick-off with a cover of Eno's Third Uncle, and move on to the death glam Silent Hedges, before moving to the industrial decayscape of Swing the Heartache. The first side concludes with the incongruously cheery Spirit. This song would be a bit of a bum note if not for the fact that it's extremely welcome after all the midnight misery preceding it.

Side two starts with the Three Shadows, a song in three parts. Part one is all groany-ghosty, part two is an interlude of Bad Seeds-esque country, while part three concludes with some standard Murphy shrieking and fiddle-playing. Then there's the gentle ballad All We Ever Wanted was Everything, before the closer, Exquisite Corpse, a - well - exquisite corpse construction that sums to an absurdist finale.

# Burning From the Inside (1983)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Qxqq5vahHKk" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The group's final album continued the freeform surrealism featured in The Sky's Gone Out, most overtly on Antonin Artaud, but also in the giddy King Volcano and atmospheric Who Killed Mister Moonlight?. The standout track is She's in Parties, another reggae-inspired number that's arguably the group's final masterpiece. Elsewhere there's a sense of burnout: the title track is a bit of a slog, while Peter Murphy was absent from the recording sessions because of illness. Because of this many of the vocals are provided by weaker singers Daniel Ash and David J, and Murphy's absence is greatly to the album's detriment. In fact the album feels more like practice for the post-Bauhaus band Love and Rockets.

# Discussion

As a teenager I reckoned The Sky's Gone Out was Bauhaus' best studio album, as the varying styles and predominantly weltschmerzy tone made for a splendid existential epic. As a grownup I now feel the album is a patchy piece of water-treading. Instead my pick for best Bauhaus album is the more straightforward Mask.

Bang for buck-wise, and as a record of Bauhaus as a live act, you'd do well to also check out the live album Press the Eject and Give me the Tape. When I bought the Sky's gone out on tape I became increasingly confused that the album played out over a single side. When I flipped the tape over, it turned out Press the Eject was a bonus album on side two (this remains my most joyful record-buying experience). There's a case to be made that Press the Eject is Bauhaus' finest album. Although it's missing songs from The Sky's Gone Out and Burning from the Inside, because of the declining quality of those albums, the only song that's really missing is She's in Parties.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8a2hGhamVwA" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

What did contemporary rock critics reckon? Well, from what I've read they latched on to In the Flat Field more, as that album was released at the height (and sorrow) of Joy Division's conclusion, giving the similarly gloomy (though also rather different) Bauhaus more relevance than they later had. Thereafter the UK music press tended to ignore or scorn the group.

How goth was Bauhaus? Well, after Bela Lugosi's Dead, the band's lyrics are more JG Ballard than bat-infested castles and maidens in nighties, although songs like Hollow Hills suggest a bit of a pagan influence. But there's much preoccupation with religion and sin, and plenty of blood and horror, so the group didn't exactly swerve away from the genre they invented. However I'd say Bauhaus was cheerier than their songs' subject matter suggests. In a way Bauhaus eluded goth perhaps because they expired too early for them to be caught up in goth's weird mid 80s "pinnacle" with the likes of The Cult, a relaunched pop-friendly Cure, and the squabbling groups Sisters of Mercy and The Mission all finding a degree of mainstream success. It was as an odd niche completely out of sync with the prevailing synth-assisted dominance of Stock, Aitken and Waterman, but it persisted, at least in my country, well into the early 90s.

What attracts me to Bauhaus? As a teenager, the group invoked in me the sort of adrenaline rush I experienced in (then-frequent) panic attacks, with the effect that listening to the band's music invoked in me a kind of perverse courage. As a somewhat calmed-down adult what I chiefly love about the group is their unique sound. Ash eschewed macho guitar-god posturing in favour of a more squally, bleeding fingers tone. The drum production was always innovative, perhaps following Martin Hannant's work with Joy Division, but less frosty. The group clearly enjoyed the working in a studio, nowhere evidenced more than the dub versions of their singles, and frequently out-there B sides (my fave, the dub reggae Earwax). Murphy had a great voice, even if his stage persona relied too heavily on Iggy Pop (there's a story that Jim Osterberg himself turned up to a Bauhaus gig in New York and proceeded to - good-naturedly? - abuse Murphy for ripping him off), while his singing was a bit too self-consciously Bowiesque. (There's another story that Murphy met Bowie and was so overwhelmed the only thing he could say was "I like your shoes.")

All up, the Bauhaus canon is pretty solid, and definitely unique. A bit pretentious at times, and occasionally embarrassing. Rating them against the rest of early 80s Indie rock is a fascinatingly awkward experience. Compared to the seriousness of Joy Division the flamboyant angst of Bauhaus looks embarrassing. Of similarly glum artists The Cure and the Smiths, they weren't as melodically gifted, as critically lauded, nor as popular. The theatrical, glam aspects of the band felt a bit backwards looking in an era increasingly dominated by drum machines and DX7s (which, for example, the post-Joy Division group New Order cannily latched on to).

And yet... Bauhaus has retained a fierce following over the decades. They've reformed and toured multiple times, even managing to produce a new album in 2006 (the entirely uninteresting Go Away White). In terms of other post-Bauhaus activities, Love and Rockets had a reasonably successful career, although their efforts to chase commercial success made their music much less interesting than Bauhaus. Peter Murphy also had a respectable indie solo career. Overall their fame remains... well I want to say "undead", but that's a bit on the nose. Alright then: their fame lives on!
